CONTRIBUTING: add section on getting your PR merged (#345033)
NixOS/nixpkgs: CONTRIBUTING.md

  As an exception, an explicit conditional expression with null can be used when fixing a important bug without triggering a mass rebuild.
  If this is done a follow up pull request _should_ be created to change the code to `lib.optional(s)`.

## I opened a PR, how do I get it merged?
[i-opened-a-pr-how-do-i-get-it-merged]:#i-opened-a-pr-how-do-i-get-it-merged

In order for your PR to be merged, someone with merge permissions on the repository needs to review and merge it.
Because the group of people with merge permissions is mostly a collection of independent unpaid volunteers who do this in their own free time, this can take some time to happen. It is entirely normal for your PR to sit around without any feedback for days, weeks or sometimes even months. We strive to avoid the latter cases of course but the reality of it is that this does happen quite frequently. Even when you get feedback, further feedback may take similarly long. Don't be intimidated by this and kindly ask for feedback again every so often. If your change is good it will eventually be merged at some point.

> There are some things you can do to help speed up the process of your PR being merged though. In order to speed the process up, you need to know what needs to happen before a committer will actually hit the merge button. This section intends to give a little overview and insight of what happens after you create your PR.

Reviewer: You use the word committer here without defining it before. I think this might be a bit confusing. Maybe write "the group of people with merge permissions (the committers)" in the paragraph before.

### The committer's perspective

PRs have varying quality and even the best people make mistakes. It is the role of the committer team to assess whether any PR's changes are good changes or not. In order for any PR to be merged, at least one committer needs to be convinced of its quality enough to merge it.

Committers typically assess three aspects of your PR:

1. Whether the change's intention is necessary and desirable
2. Whether the code quality of your changes is good
3. Whether the artefacts produced by the code are good

If you want your PR to get merged quickly and smoothly, it is in your best interest to help convince committers in these three aspects.

### How to help committers assess your PR

> For the committer to judge your intention, it's best to explain why you've made your change. For trivial changes like version updates, you can omit this part of course because the intention is obvious but for anything more nuanced or even major version upgrades, it helps if you explain the background behind your change a bit. E.g. if you're adding a package, explain what it is and why it should be in Nixpkgs.

Reviewer: This is somewhat contrary to other parts of the documentation where we suggest to include a changelog url for version upgrades. I quite like this suggestion.

Author: Hm, changelogs are a good point though. They're useful to have but I never bother to include them myself... ^^'

This goes hand in hand with [Writing good commit messages](#writing-good-commit-messages).

For the code quality assessment, you cannot do anything yourself as only the committer can do this and they already have your code to look at.
In order to minimise the need for back and forth though, do take a look over your code changes yourself and try to put yourself into the shoes of someone who didn't just write that code. Would you immediately know what the code does by glancing at it? If not, reviewers will notice this and will ask you to clarify the code by refactoring it and/or adding a few explanations in code comments. Doing this preemptively can save you and the committer a lot of time.

The code artefacts are the hardest for committers to assess because PRs touch all sorts of components: applications, libraries, NixOS modules, editor plugins and many many other things. Any individual committer can only really assess components that they themselves know how to use however and yet they must still be convinced somehow. There isn't a good generic solution to this but there are some ways easing the committer's job here:

> - Provide smoke tests that the committer can run without much research or setup.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Provide smoke tests that the committer can run without much research or setup.

```

This will make a paragraph under the bullet item instead of having a huge bullet item.

Author: I had placed a double space at the end of this to force a line break.

TIL nixpkgs explicitly disallows that:

https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/blob/4e74b7332b0a3cd83c6b6f501a7dfa184a103c36/.editorconfig#L66-L72

> - Provide smoke tests that the committer can run without much research or setup.

Reviewer 2: And of course:

```suggestion
- Add documentation on how to start using the software component you're working on.

  Instructions for configuring the software and pointers to upstream documentation will make it easier for reviewers as well as for future users to judge the relevance of your contribution.
   
- Provide smoke tests that the committer can run without much research or setup.
```

Author: Haha :)

This removes the important part of this sentence though: That it doesn't require research or setup.

I also don't know where you would even put such documentation, especially not in a way that reviewers can easily find.

Reviewer 2: - Oh but I thought to put it into package documentation. With pkgs/by-name we even have a canonical place to put a per-package README.

Author: If you don't know an established "standard" place to put such documentation either, I can't expect other committers to look for it either. 

Remember, the purpose of this document is to inform about the status quo and give recommendations on how to work with it, not provide new policies (that's what RFCs are for).

Until we have such an established place, we should recommend other ways of conveying the information that would be put into package documentation such as asking people to provide it every time.

Reviewer 2: Pro tip: make things a reality by simply saying they are.

This is what the suggestion is about. If providing relevant information about a piece of software will help reviewers, it will help users too. Just let people put it into predictable places (such as a by-name README) and we'll see from there. And if people ask why one can't find examples, say "it's a new thing, trust me and do it".

If you want it to be more specific, make it. It's just an suggestion. :)

Author: I won't be pursuing this in this PR.

  Committers usually don't have the time or interest to learn how your component works and how they could test its functionality. If you can provide a quick guide on how to use the component in a meaningful way or a ready-made command that demonstrates that the package works as expected, the committer can easily convince themselves that your change is good.

>   If it's automate-able, you could even turn this smoke test into an automated NixOS test which reviewers could simply run via Nix.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  If it can be automated, you could even turn this smoke test into an automated NixOS test which reviewers could simply run with Nix.
```

- Invite other users of the component to try it out and report their findings.
  If a committer sees the testimonials of other users trying your change and it works as expected for them, that too can convince the committer of your PR's quality.
- Describe what you have done to test your PR.
  If you can convince the committer that you have done sufficient quality assurance on your changes and they trust your report, this too can convince them of your PR's quality, albeit not as strongly as the methods above.

> - Be a maintainer of the component.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Become a maintainer of the component.
```

  This isn't something you can do on your first few PRs touching a component but listed maintainers generally receive more trust when it comes to changes to their maintained components and committers may opt to merge changes without deeper review when they see they're done by their respective maintainer.

Even if you adhere to all of these recommendations, it is still quite possible for your PR to be forgotten or abandoned by any given committer. Please remain mindful of the fact that they are doing this on their own volition and unpaid in their free time and therefore [owe you nothing](https://mikemcquaid.com/open-source-maintainers-owe-you-nothing/). Causing a stink in such a situation is a surefire way to get any other potential committer to not want to look at your PR either.
Ask them nicely whether they still intend to review your PR and find yourself another committer to look at your PR if not.

### How can I get a committer to look at my PR?

> - Simply waiting. Reviewers frequently browse open PRs and may happen to run across yours and take a look.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Simply wait.

  Reviewers frequently browse open PRs and may happen to run across yours and take a look.
```

Use imperative in instructions. Gerund is just more letters, and thus, more to parse.

> - Directly mentioning someone (`@committergithubhandlehere`) and asking them nicely

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [@-mention](https://github.blog/news-insights/mention-somebody-they-re-notified/) someone and ask them nicely
```

> - Posting in one of the channels made for this purpose

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Posting in one of the channels made for this purpose when it's unreviewed for a week or longer
```

When in any doubt, please simply ask via a comment in your PR or through one of the help channels.

### A reviewer requested a bunch of insubstantial changes on my PR

The people involved in Nixpkgs care about code quality because, once in Nixpkgs, it needs to be maintained for many years to come. It is therefore likely that other people will ask you to do some things in another way or adhere to some standard.
Sometimes however, they also care a bit too much and may ask you to adhere to a personal preference of theirs. It's not always easy to tell which is which and whether the requests are critically important to merging the PR.
Sometimes another reviewer may also come along with totally different opinions on some points too.

It is convention to mark review comments that are not critical to the PR as nitpicks but this is not always followed. As the PR author, you should still take a look at these as they will often reveal best practices and unwritten rules that usually have good reasons behind them and you may want to incorporate them into your modus operandi.

> Please keep in mind that reviewers are almost always well meaning here. Their intent is not to denounce your code, they simply want your code to be as good as it can be.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Please keep in mind that reviewers are almost always mean well. Their intent is not to denounce your code, they simply want your code to be as good as it can be.
```

> Sometimes, they can get a bit carried away and become perfectionistic. If you feel some of the requests are unreasonable or a matter of taste, try to nicely remind the reviewers that you may not intend this code to be 100% perfect or that you have different taste in some regards and press them on whether they think that these requests are *critical* to the PR's success.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Sometimes, they can get a bit carried away and become perfectionistic. If you feel some of the requests are unreasonable or a matter of taste, try to nicely remind the reviewers that you may not intend this code to be 100% perfect or that you have different taste in some regards and press them on whether they think that these requests are *critical* to the PR's success.
```
```suggestion
Sometimes, they can get a bit carried away and become perfectionist. If you feel some of the requests are unreasonable or a matter of taste, try to nicely remind the reviewers that you may not intend this code to be 100% perfect or that you have different taste in some regards and press them on whether they think that these requests are *critical* to the PR's success.
```
